121
Equipotentials at a great distance from a collection of charges whose total sum is not zero are approximately
(a) spheres
(b) planes
(c) paraboloids
(d) ellipsoids
Answer: a
122
A positively charged particle is released from rest in an uniform electric field. The electric potential energy of the charge
(a) remains a constant because the electric field is uniform.
(b) increases because the charge moves along the electric field.
(c) decreases because the charge moves along the electric field.
(d) decreases because the charge moves opposite to the electric field.
Answer: c
123
Two small spheres each carrying a charge q are placed r metre apart. If one of the spheres is taken around the other one in a circular path of radius r, the work done will be equal to
(a) force between them × r
(b) force between them × 2(pi)r
(c) force between them/2(pi)r
(d) zero
Answer: d
124
The electric potential V at any point O (x, y, z all in metres) in space is given by V = 4x^2 volt. The electric field at the point (1 m, 0, 2 m) in volt/metre is
(a) 8 along negative x-axis
(b) 8 along positive x-axis
(c) 16 along negative x-axis
(d) 16 along positive z-axis
Answer: a
125
If a unit positive charge is taken from one point to another over an equipotential surface, then
(a) work is done on the charge.
(b) work is done by the charge.
(c) work done is constant.
(d) no work is done.
Answer: d
126
A hollow metal sphere of radius 5 cm is charged so that the potential on its surface is 10 V. The potential at the centre of the sphere is
(a) 0 V
(b) 10 V
(c) Same as at point 5 cm away from the surface
(d) Same as at point 25 cm away from the surface
Answer: b
127
The electrostatic force between the metal plates of an isolated parallel plate capacitor C having a charge Q and area A, is
(a) proportional to the square root of the distance between the plates.
(b) linearly proportional to the distance between the plates.
(c) independent of the distance between the plates.
(d) inversely proportional to the distance between the plates.
Answer: c
128
A capacitor is charged by a battery. The battery is removed and another identical uncharged capacitor is connected in parallel. The total electrostatic energy of resulting system
(a) increases by a factor of 4.
(b) decreases by a factor of 2.
(c) remains the same.
(d) increases by a factor of 2.
Answer: b
129
 A conductor with a positive charge
(a) is always at +ve potential.
(b) is always at zero potential.
(c) is always at negative potential.
(d) may be at +ve, zero or -ve potential.
Answer: d
130
Which of the following options are correct? If a conductor has a potential V 4- 0 and there are no charges anywhere else outside, then
(a) there must not be charges on the surface or inside itself.
(b) there cannot be any charge in the body of the conductor.
(c) there must be charges only on the surface.
(d) there must be charges inside the surface.
Answer: b
131
The radii of two metallic spheres A and B are r1 and r2 respectively (r1 > r2). They are connected by a thin wire and the system is given a certain charge. The charge will be greater
(a) on the surface of the sphere B.
(b) on the surface of the sphere A.
(c) equal on both.
(d) zero on both.
Answer: b
132
A parallel plate condenser is connected with the terminals of a battery. The distance between the plates is 6mm. If a glass plate (dielectric constant K = 9) of 4.5 mm is introduced between them, then the capacity will become
(a) 2 times.
(b) the same.
(c) 3 times.
(d) 4 times.
Answer: c
133
Which of the following statement is true?
(a) Electrostatic force is a conservative force.
(b) Potential at a point is the work done per unit charge in bringing a charge from any point to infinity.
(c) Electrostatic force is non-conservative
(d) Potential is the product of charge and work.
Answer: a